Last thing we left off on.
We can cut it. We can start over on some.
We just got through talking about that.
Can I ask a question about the Dream Master?
Sure.
I think it was originally He Who Shakes.
Right.
Story Yelping.
Yeah.
You mentioned somewhere that Render, of course it's obvious in the story too, that Render
has a flaw.
Would his flaw be hubris?
The pride?
And thinking he can pull off what he's trying to do?
That was my original intention, yes, in the shorter version.
It might have, when I expanded it to book length, it might have gotten a bit more diffuse
because of the various things that were interpolated.
But basically, yes, that was what I had in mind.
It's a harken back to the so-called new wave style.
You have a whiz-buying scientist in the grand tradition of Campbell, a person who has marvelous
abilities with the neural participation therapist.
Right.
Yeah.
He's a neural.
Neural participation therapist.
Right.
Who has great abilities as a neural participation therapist.
But he has this one flaw, and that's where your story departs from what would be called
a so-called standard science fiction story.
And I think really what makes it a very interesting story in the fact that he gets drawn in by
his own ego, and that eventually is his downfall.
Yeah, that was what I had in mind.
He was good, obviously, and the only situation he undertook to resolve was really beyond
him or beyond any therapist.
There were other contributing factors, gradual infatuation with his patients and everything,
but basically the reason for doing it was hubris.
So it was not a traditional science fiction story in the Campbell sense.
My focus was on more on character, whereas the Campbell sort of story, it was one of
these things Kings of the Amos who called the place for the ideas the hero rather than
the people in the story.
So that was just...
Why don't we go on to road marks?
Do we have some questions on that one?
Yeah, I have one more on this one, which we may just whack out because it's kind of dumb
because I don't understand union psychology myself, but you used some union psychology
in this story.
Is that not correct?
Yes, that's right.
Well, as I mentioned, I was a psychology major as an undergraduate for a period of time,
and getting away from themes and standards and values and all that, looking at it from
a purely practical standpoint, when I began writing, I knew a lot about mythology.
My first book, Miss Immortal, drew upon that background because that was the easiest thing
for me to do, to create my first book.
When it came time to do my second one, I didn't want to do exactly the same sort of things
I had done in my first one, and in thinking about it, the next large body of information
I possessed, it involved psychology, and it was for that reason that I developed the sort
of character I did in Dream Master, my second book.
And apart from the way that psychological theory worked in the book itself, that was one
practical reason I used that sort of thing for that book.
But yes, here I was doing more in the way of that psychological theory looks at myth
than I was in just looking at it in general as a story.
Yeah, that's about all I can think to say on that one.
Do you want to go ahead and do a little more today?
No, that's okay.
Yeah.
Why don't you go ahead and I'll try and make it.
Okay, you and me.
None of the matter.
Me either.
Three Stooges over here.
A lot of writers tend to avoid, okay let me start, a lot of the harder science fiction
writers tend to avoid some of the time travel stories because of the fantasy element that
almost has to be present there because of things like grandfather paradox and things
that you can't very well explain.
I guess with your fantasy background and things that you're doing, it was an attractive alternative
for you, wasn't it?
I have always attempted to avoid time travel stories because I don't like the paradoxes
involved.
In fact the only thing I can think of that I had done in the past was a short story called
Divine Madness.
I said that I really wouldn't write a time travel story unless I came up with a new gimmick.
Well for road marks I thought I had something just in the image of time considered as a
super highway basically and without for the paradoxes in an Everett Wheeler parallel world
sort of situation.
It was really the image of the road that fascinated me and led to my writing that particular
book but normally I avoid time travel.
I think you had something rather interesting in here in that your time travel story really
focuses on the travelers and who they are and what they're doing rather than the places
that they're traveling to.
And of course the problem that the protagonist has in that he's been put a contract, he's
been put out against him and a person has ten chances to kill him during this contract
and his various ways of getting around these ten attempts on his life.
Really they weren't like traveling back to ancient China to do something.
It was more of a story about the traveler and what was happening to him rather than
I guess what it would be called a traditional time travel story.
Yeah that was my intention really.
I didn't have anything that elaborate that I wanted to do at any particular point in history
that I wanted to focus on it and draw in all sorts of cultural materials and try to create
a true picture of a culture from the past.
It was more the device itself of traveling on the road and the different things that
followed once the situation was set up.
That sort of allows you to avoid some of those paradoxes too doesn't it?
Yes, yes and the way I broke the story itself down structurally was intended once the reader
caught on to what was going on to make it a little clearer and at the same time to try to give the
impression of the time situation that prevailed.
I mean following the main character in all the chapters, title one and all the twos being asynchronous.
I mean some could precede the others really since they were off the road or passing on the road at different points.
I got the idea for that book here in New Mexico really one Sunday I was just out for a drive and I-25 which was a nice
highway type road took a turn off and drove for a few minutes and the road rapidly degenerated until
with a matter of minutes I was on a dirt road and I passed through a place that I couldn't even find on the map.
It was a little village which where there was a horse pulling a wagon and no overhead electrical lines in sight.
It was almost as if I had driven back through time into the 19th century there were log buildings and
somewhere around there something started to click and as I drove back again and the road improved and improved
until finally I was on the super highway I started working out the just the mechanisms for the idea of driving
through time which I used in road marks and actually by the time I got home I had a number of the situations worked out
and I sat down began writing it.
The protagonist there I think red door can I think yes as in many of your stories almost any narrative the hero has a quest or a task
and what I took at his was to he's running guns to the Greeks I think it was a marathon.
I wasn't quite sure why he was doing that isn't that sort of a futile task even if he succeeded and the history wouldn't have been changed so much
as another time stream would have been created.
He was trying to duplicate though the earliest situation that he remembered.
He figured if he could find his way back to the road or the parallel world variation thereof which was an image of the one on which he first found himself
and his earliest memories that he might from that road be able to find his way back home again.
And that basically was a part by changing this one aspect of history.
There would be a kind of domino effect and he'd find himself back in the earlier situation that he was looking for and he was curious as to his own origins
and wanted to find his way back.
I particularly like the guy that buries the artifacts and then later mix them up again.
Yes, yes.
That's great.
The dragons, I think the dragons of Belquines, is that what they were talking about?
Were they modeled on or taken from any particular mythology or legend that I wasn't aware of or was that something of your own construction?
Oh, they were simply to represent the dark forces which I tend to bring in any fantasy novel.
In a story like this there has to be a point where you have to ultimately reach something that's basically unexplainable.
Namely where did the road come from and how did it come to function the way that it did?
And in making a decision on that I could go either way.
I could find some science fiction trappings and explain it or I could leave it intentionally something shadowy with a more fantasy background.
If I did that I decided I needed some symbol to invoke as an ultimate creator of the road, hence the dragons and then they're tie-in with red.
There is a movie script that was just written, roadmarks, not be able to over there as a matter of fact, with no dragons.
Partly for technical reasons it's difficult to introduce a dragon.
The way of special effects when the focus of the whole movie isn't really on that.
Did you do the script yourself?
No, a friend of mine did. Casey St. Charnais has scripted it.
Has that been sold?
No, actually he did it on spec but there is someone interested in it right now.
He just finished scripting it last month. I just got a copy a few days ago.
So there is really nothing to say at this point.
One of your other works has been turned into a movie, Damnation Alley.
You didn't write the screenplay for that, I take it.
No, a fellow named Lucas Heller did originally.
His fellow wrote Hush Hush Sweet Charlotte on Living England at the time.
I never met him, but they brought him back a number of times to revise the script.
I received a copy of what was said, the final script on it and I read it and I liked it very much.
After that it was revised several more times. Apparently they weren't quite pleased with it at the studio.
Eventually another writer was given it and he revised it again.
I did not see any of these later revisions of the script.
The one I read I liked and the one that was actually used as a basis for shooting was different.
They changed it rather drastically from your original novel.
I guess basically what's left in there is the long trek across the United States.
They lost your characterizations.
The biker who's sort of been boxed into a corner and he has to go across Damnation Alley.
Right.
Between Los Angeles and Boston.
He's been sort of forced into it. If he doesn't do it he's going back to jail.
I was not overjoyed with the production.
On the other hand, I think Hemingway is the one who said that if you deal with Hollywood you should stand on the other side of the California state line
and have them throw you the money and catch it and run.
Which is usually when you sell something to the movies you expect a lot of changes.
You're not disappointed.
They didn't disappoint you on that count.
I thought that was a rather unzalasny like kind of a story.
I think you wrote somewhere where you'd read a book on the Hell's Angels recently and that was part of the impetus for that.
Was that sort of a mood piece?
I wrote that very quickly. Less than a month.
Oh, I just liked the notion.
There was nothing particularly involved about it.
If you wanted my thinking at all, the only thing I had in terms of the characterization or character development was sort of a consideration of the ideas to whether...
Is there much of a difference in terms of the ultimate effect or in ultimately considering something as an act of heroism?
If it's something done by a good person for noble motives or if it's something done by a much less nicer person for all the wrong reasons if the results are the same?
In a sense they're still both heroes.
My character is not completely changed into a nice guy by anything he experiences in the story.
Beyond this small consideration in terms of the way one looks at the results of an act, it was pretty much a travelogue with a lot of shooting.
I had no great pretensions about this as being anything more than that.
It was basically an action-adventure story which I had fun writing.
And that's all to say about that.
What kind of new works are you working on now?
Well, let's see.
First of all, there are two books coming out, one in April, this being 1981.
A fantasy novel which Ballantine will be doing called The Changing Land, which is the first novel featuring a character I used in a number of short stories over the years called Dilvish.
This is a pure sword and sorcery type fantasy.
And in October Ace will be doing another one of those large Ace trade paperbacks titled Mad Wand, one word.
This being the sequel to Changeling which came out last summer.
Also another fantasy.
I am now doing something which is more straight science fiction, though it does also involves mythological elements and touches that might be considered fantasy here and there.
It's a book called Eye of Cat, which I am doing for Apocket Books, Simon and Schuster, which is set in the early 22nd century.
Partly there, there being a map I am pointing out on the floor of the Navajo Reservation, my main character being a Navajo Indian.
So far so good. I am pleased with the opening I have got. I just started work on this book fairly recently. I hope to have it finish this spring.
Simultaneous with this, there is a book which I am currently doing in, well I haven't done a thing on it yet.
He is starting a book which is going to be a collaboration between Fred Saber Hagen and myself, which we will hopefully have finished by this summer.
This is a straight science fiction as opposed to a fantasy or any mixture thereof.
And then once these two are out of the way I am considering the possibility of doing another Amber Book.
I do have a number of short things coming out in the near future.
Story being I think about the March issue of Omni called The Last of the Wild Ones, which is a sequel to a story I had published 15 years ago in Galaxy called Devil Car.
And story coming up in the next few months in Isaac Asimov's science fiction magazine called Unicorn Variation Fantasy.
I am going to have something in the second issue of the Twilight Zone magazine, short short fantasy.
And seems to me there are a few other things which slip my mind at the moment.
You mentioned a collaboration. You have already written one novel I know of when you collaborated with Philip K. Dick I believe it was.
Yes.
So Deus Era, is that how it works?
Deus Era, yes, God of Wrath.
So for that you were the only collaboration on a novel?
That was yes, I have done a few short things here and there in collaboration.
Are you satisfied with that kind of work? How does that work? I have never understood how two authors can really come out with a book.
Well, I am very happy with that, yes.
I suppose the only real reason for doing a book with someone else rather than doing it yourself is that you believe the final product will be something that neither one of you could have done on his own.
Hopefully it will not sound exactly like either of you.
And it will be a sort of third voice.
And now with Deus Era, Phil couldn't quite finish it on his own and I had some thoughts on it which seemed to work in nicely.
But I would never have originally conceived of a book like this on my own.
And we really did the work through the males.
I would write a section and show it to him and he would read it over and do another section and show it to me and we just proceeded through the book in that fashion.
And I don't think it sounds like anything I ever did before and Phil doesn't feel it sounds exactly like anything of his.
I am always sort of happy with that book and Phil says that he is too.
So, yeah, I am glad to have done that.
It's not the sort of thing I like to do all the time but having had a good experience there and Fred Saber-Hagan being a very good friend of mine and
thought it would be nice to try something with him on an idea we both seem to find congenial.
So I thought it would be worth giving it a try one more time to see what comes of it.
I had just one more question on one of your works.
I could think of a lot more but I think we are probably taking too much of your time on this.
The Last Defender of Camelot, the short story.
My field was Middle English and Arthurian Materia so I was fascinated with that.
The question I had was I got the impression from that story and this is something that has always frustrated me too.
You wanted Lancelot to achieve the vision of the Holy Grail.
So you decided to write a story in which he did achieve that vision.
Well, yes. As a matter of fact, you are right.
Yeah, that was a...
It was just a fun story that just came to me one day and I wrote it quickly.
Saturday evening Post asked me to cut it so I didn't really want to cut it so I found out elsewhere.
I'm glad I didn't cut it. I think it was just about the right length for something like that.
I liked using the character.
I have a sentimental attachment to that period myself.
Well, that's how it came about.
Yeah, that's just my question. Yes, it's fine.
Should we just get on to some other things in it?
You still have some more of that as well.
That's all, I'm fine.
I had a couple of questions just about... You've made some comments already which probably answered this in a way.
I guess your relation to science fiction, if I can put it that way.
Do you see yourself in it simply as a feel where you can most conveniently earn a living?
Or do you have some sort of a mission or a crusade to bring things to people's attention?
Some people like Norman Spenrad perhaps want to make science fiction part of the mainstream.
It's a commitment, if I can put it that way.
Do you have a relationship?
Well, neither of the above per se.
My relationship really is... My roots do go back to science fiction.
I read it beginning at an early age.
As with most people who read science fiction, I also, when I started, read it backwards as well as forwards.
I would pick up old magazines from the early 40s and the 30s, and I'd get books earlier in the century.
I think I am a product in this sense of all the science fiction traditions which went to make up the area.
I mean, the space opera is there. The hard science, they feel it there sometimes.
And the reaction to it which came before the so-called new wave, the sociological science that creeps into sometimes.
And then the period itself when I began writing the 60s being what they were.
And the fact that I have not stopped reading science fiction and trying to keep up with the area, which is getting harder and harder to do.
No, I actually do write it because I have great fondness for it.
And I am familiar in general with all the outlines of the field.
Do you think it's being neglected or that it should have more of a place in the classroom or the traditional literary mainstream?
Or is it something that belongs in its own category?
I don't know. This can be argued in a number of ways.
Of course, there are those who say there was no separate genre of science fiction until 1926 when Gernsbach published the first science fiction magazine and had to call it something.
And the term eventually got coined and before that if H. G. Wells had done a novel or Jules Verne it would just be shelved in the library along with all the other works of general fiction and might just be called a scientific romance.
On the other hand, a lot of stuff is published these days.
That is science fiction, that is not called science fiction.
Depending on who writes it, of course, I mean back when On the Beach was published it wasn't published as science fiction.
You can think of numerous examples and of course in recent years there have been science fiction novels, which have made the best seller list.
But it is a special area for me.
Okay, if...
It is for one reason, one of the few special places where you still deal with characters other than those which occur in the modern realistic or naturalistic novel.
Going back to the critic Northrop Frye who spoke of characters in various modes.
Science fiction is one of the few places outside of modern poetry where a writer can deal with characters in what he called the Chaimimetic or the Mythic modes.
That is characters who are greater than their fellow man or characters who are godlike sometimes.
Science fiction deals with mutants and aliens and sentient computers and cyborgs and robots.
What have you, just old categories of beings which are different than the characters you meet with in a naturalistic or realistic novel.
In that sense, and I think this is one of the great virtues of science fiction, it gives the writer more scope for exploration in terms of character than just general fiction.
So there is... if this does get injected and taken up by the mainstream, I would be very surprised really.
I think that science fiction periodically undergoes... hits a peak.
I think it's a cyclical thing that it is eventually taken up for a while, considered, and then something new happens.
I think it's more a matter of fashion and taste than it is something enduring.
I think it is doubtless better known now than ever was before in its history.
There will come a point when it's even better known, but I don't know that it will ever ultimately be merged with mainstream of fiction.
Of course the mainstream of fiction 50 years from now may sound like science fiction today, but that's a little bit different.
Well if I remember what you wrote a piece for Galaxy, which was someone on this topic, a column for Galaxy where you said that in a sense science fiction takes a place of the epic.
The mainstream literature of the novel is realistic.
That science fiction sort of is... I don't know if you meant it this way, is an extension or a survival of the epic tradition where you deal with mythological creatures and larger than life human beings or things of that sort.
In other words there is a separation in that sense.
Yes, I still feel that way.
And despite the fact that this is present and that science fiction is dealing with what people outside the area might look like a more grotesque or surrealistic sort of thing,
it's actually in many ways a more traditional thing than a lot of things that have been going on in modern experimental writing.
I mean the new wave never went so far as some writers such as Finesco or Beckett or Rob Grele,
even then it was introspective and it was occasionally surrealistic.
But ultimately all of the things that were done by the new wave writers in the 60s were brought back into the general area in the 70s, which was sort of a period of synthesis.
I mean we still have the space operas of the 30s and 40s.
They're more sophisticated but they're with us and we have people writing the hard science stories.
Also Larry Niven is a good example of a more sophisticated version of the hard science stories.
We've got the, oh say Fred Pole doing the sociological science fiction story that was on the 50s and there are people still doing their 1960s things experimentally.
But ultimately I think all of these things got fed back and the synthesis that came about in the 70s brought all of them together I think and just enhanced the general level quality level.
There are new writers like say Varley who combine all of these things.
I think in a way science fiction is old fashioned in the same sense that, let me think of an example.
I think much of modern fiction suffered as a result of him forester's writing aspects of the novel back in the late 20s where he as much as said that the story is secondary.
It's kind of a hook on which to hang psychological studies and games with ideas.
The book did have a make a big impression on academics and filtered down through into general area of criticism.
Before that writers were more traditional storytellers.
Alphonse Daudet was one of the most popular writers in the world back around 1870s and 80s.
Anatole France was an extremely popular writer earlier in the century.
John Copper Poets is hardly read today and Dickens has other virtues which have caused him to survive.
All four of them had in common the fact that they were storytellers.
Basically they had plots, stories with beginnings, middles and ends.
This got to be a bit unfashionable in terms of higher literature following aspects of the novel and various things that fed off of it.
I think that science fiction is still basically for all of the experimentation that went on in the 60s a bastion of storytelling.
The idea is not necessarily the hero anymore as it was in the days Kingsley Amos referred to it as being such back in the 40s and perhaps the 50s.
But we have real characters now and ideas are handled in a more sophisticated fashion.
The writing has also improved from a stylistic standpoint but basically I think if you looked at the area, well even statistically,
there are more examples of straightforward storytelling in science fiction than you might find in general fiction at large.
So that is another reason I am very fond of science fiction because I am basically a storyteller no matter what I do with mythology or writing devices.
This may be one of the reasons that science fiction will not get total academic acceptance.
It in this sense will seem more naive than some of the things being done by some of the more experimental writers in the world at large.
To answer your question from which I drifted a great distance, I don't think it will necessarily be merged with the mainstream and I also do not think that this is necessarily a bad thing at all.
It was Santayana who said that about something else entirely but which I think is apropos to attempt to give such things a wide currency is to be willing to denature them in order to post that they have been propagated.
I think science fiction will always have its devotees and that they will grow in number just as the population itself increases but I don't know that the percentage is ever going to increase that greatly.
I answered a lot of them quickly.
He answered almost all of them now.
Go ahead, I have some more.
I was about to roll through the last part of this tape.
You've written both science fiction and fantasy. Which do you enjoy more writing?
It's like George Zell used to say about Brahms.
I went to a graduate work at Western Reserves which is at the Severance Hall, the Cleveland Symphony right on campus.
I remember our music appreciation professor once asked him which of Brahms symphonies he preferred.
He always said the one I just finished conducting.
Whatever I'm writing at the moment, that's what I'm most wrapped up in.
I don't know that I have a prejudice that much one way or the other.
Ultimately, I suppose it would be some sort of marriage of the two.
A science fiction story where I get a few fantasy elements in and sort of sneak them in through the back door.
I like to do this just because I think that however distorted an image of life you use for a science fiction story,
I mean by projecting something into the future or a parallel world or what have you,
you are still showing the human condition that everyone is familiar with.
And in everyone's experience, no matter what they know, there are certain things that they do not know.
It does not mean that the things they do not know are ultimately unexplainable.
It just means there are certain dark areas or pockets of not knowing in their life.
And I think that this should be reflected in a piece of fiction for it to have verisimilitude.
So I intentionally like to leave little dark areas in my story where things may be explainable,
but I don't explain them just because this imitates life.
And those are the little nooks and crannies and places where I like to put in a touch of mythological or fantasy type images or possibilities.
They may be real, they may not be but they.
So I like them both, I suppose, ultimately I like to see them both together some way.
Would it be fair to ask you if you have any particularly favorite works?
Yeah, I guess.
I have a great sentimental attachment to my first book, This Immortal.
I think in some ways my best book is Lord of Light.
That's because I put an awful lot of work into that and I was happy with the way it came out.
And if I hadn't named a third one, I would say Doorways in the Sand, which I also enjoyed writing quite a bit.
Among shorter pieces I like for a breath I tarry.
I think I'll stop there.
Are you surprised that your own works have become popular and were you more or less,
did you know that they were going to be successful when you started?
I think every writer I know has this thing most people would consider an ego trip.
He considers himself great and unrecognized and some day the world will know better.
But I think one of the things in writing, as in many other things, is a matter of persistence and staying power.
If you write and are published steadily and your name is there,
more people eventually will read it and there will come a point where you will be known if you stay with it as I have done now.
So I figured that if I did someday I would be known.
Beyond that, I don't know.
It's nice when something catches on, like the way the Amber book is done.
But I'm sure that feels good to a lot of fan mail or if somebody want to move the option on something.
Various foreign publishers want foreign rights on something.
You feel maybe you are reaching a number of people who enjoy it.
Yeah, yeah, it does feel good.
I was going to say in the opinion of many people, myself included, I think that you are now and will be remembered as one of the greater writers in the field.
Is there anything in particular that you want to be remembered for in your body of work, sometime in the future when it's completed?
Is there anything in particular that you would like to be known as or remembered for or whatever?
Or is that a fair question to ask an author?
I guess, fair, but I'm not sure I have an answer.
It's, I don't know, it's not that simple.
If it's something you could just state in a few words, I suppose I'd write an essay saying these I think are standards and values that people should think about and this and that.
But really, I don't know, I tend to express myself by analogy and I don't really have a good parable here at any point.
I don't know that I, the things I look to do in writing 10 or 15 years ago are the same as the things I'm looking to do now, but there are similarities.
And I probably take me a book to try to figure them out and explain them so I can't answer that when I have to beg the question.
Well, just perhaps, I would say bringing enjoyment to people, telling a story. You see yourself as a storyteller.
Oh, yeah, yeah. If, no, I thought you were saying is there some burning message?
Man kind of, but oh no.
I enjoy telling stories and I like, I want to be read, sure, not just for the royalties.
I hope I can give people some enjoyment and I hope I never fall into a complete rot.
I know that there are similarities and characters and I hope that I keep changing sufficiently so that my stories and my storytelling abilities evolve so that I can keep people amused for a long time and entertained.
Yeah, there's that.
One other question.
Do you have any more questions?
Oh, yeah.
That's two.
One.
Do you have much, or do you do any writing in response to fans, either fans of conventions or letters or so forth?
I remember Prince Larry Niven said that he'd written the Ring World Engineers because of fan pressure, not pressure, but so forth.
Do you do any kind of writing at all because of fans?
Isn't science fiction sort of unique in that there is a relationship there between the writers and the fans, especially at the conventions and so forth?
I see what you mean.
I have never, that I can think of, offhand written a specific story in response to anything like that.
But on the other hand, like I mentioned earlier, that the Amber books brought a lot of response in the way of letters.
Now, some of them raised some good points about things I had either neglected intentionally or inadvertently and different things that they would like to see explained somewhere in the series, which I have yet to explain.
At some point, I began saving some of these letters.
And I think if I were to continue the series, I would review them and see how many of those I considered valid.
And they might condition some of the things I would say in another book, at least to the point where I feel if someone's gone to the trouble of reading five books in a series,
I might take a few paragraphs to satisfy their curiosity as to a few things somewhere in the 6th book.
So yeah, yeah, it's possible that I, that's an instance of what you were asking about.
David, do you want one more?
Yeah, just a general question about science fiction fans.
One thing I think I think it's kind of unique in the fact that most science fiction authors were at one time science fiction fans who became science fiction authors and now have science fiction fans.
That's pretty good.
Yeah, that's that is the, you know, there is a.
Most people I know who write science fiction, there are a few exceptions, but most of them started out in an early age as I did reading and I also did edit a fanzine briefly in the early 50s.
And it in that sense, I suppose it is an incestuous little area where there are only, you know, a few hundred science fiction writers doing all the material and all of them know one another at any given convention.
And a number of them will be present and talk to one another as well as to the fans gathered around there and ideas do get bounced around and enjoy considerable currency.
Offhand, I can't think of any other area of writing that has this peculiar feedback set up.
I mean, mystery writers to get together for their own banquets and things, but there's no big mystery fandom in the way that there is a science fiction fandom or Western fandom.
And a fandom either, it's kind of peculiar in the sense that you do get that response to what you've written.